---
title: Social Responsibility in Tech
date: "2021-01-10T22:12:03.284Z"
description: "A reflection on technology and the future of work"
---


During conversations with friends and family, it’s often difficult to express the importance of safety in artificial intelligence. It’s no exaggeration to say that no group understands the implications of high level machine intelligence, not even ai experts themselves. During a AI conference in 2018, research experts estimated that “unaided machines [would] accomplish every task better and more cheaply than human workers” by 2050. However, the variance within the estimates was very high, which decreases the accuracy of the estimate. No one knows exactly when this immensely disruptive technology will start disrupting the global workforce, but it will happen eventually. And we as a society living on earth must address this problem before it’s too late.

I first witnessed the potential of artificial intelligence and automation having a direct effect on the American job market in 2018. I had just finished High School and was working my first office job at SwimKids in Northern Virginia. Within my first weeks of working, I had used the programming skills I learned in school to develop several computer scripts that would automate office tasks. Within a couple of months of working, the managers had noticed that I often had nothing to do at work. The programs that I created were able to replicate my work without making any mistakes in a couple minutes compared to the hours it took my coworkers to accomplish the same tasks. As a result, my team shrunk from 8 people to a mere 2--myself and my direct supervisor. It took me years to realize the impact that these programs had on the future of the company and my coworkers. With some basic knowledge of programming, I had permanently put 6 people out of work. 

Today, Facebook, Google, Twitter, and many other tech giants have access to large teams composed of the best and brightest in ai and machine learning with hundreds of thousands more computational power than my laptop back in 2018. How many people will they put out of a job? What about a couple years in the future, when their computational power doubles and their methodology improves exponentially, how many jobs will no longer exist because machines can do it better, faster, and more cheaply? This prospect both scares me of the future and motivates me to inform as many people as I can about this truth I am uniquely qualified to understand. 

This issue has motivated me to pursue a computer science degree and to participate in undergraduate ai research. My hope is to become a bridge between the cutting edge of machine intelligence and the general public. I want to make a difference as early as possible because neither ai researchers nor I know how much time we have until the tech giants have achieved general artificial intelligence. Once the genie is out of the bottle, there’s no putting it back in. 

Perhaps the greatest unfairness is the same problem I run into when trying to explain my concerns during a dinner conversation with my family, or while conversing with my non-technical friends. The general public just isn’t equipped with the necessary tools to understand the ramifications of advanced machine intelligence onto every facet of human life. We’re not talking about Alexa coming up with increasingly sophisticated answers to frivolous questions, or video games having more realistic physics simulations. This is a revolution comparable to the advent of the steam machine or the printing press, except much more scalable and available globally within an instant thanks to the internet. 

My immediate goals are creating a website to serve as a platform to voice my concerns in a way that is accessible to everyone. Secondly, I want to persuade employees in the aforementioned tech companies to work within their own organizations to promote a culture of safety and cultural mindfulness so that is entrenched in their minds that their work will one day affect a large portion of the global workforce. Lastly, I want these companies to sign the Windfall Clause, an agreement a company makes to donate a significant portion of their wealth if they ever receive extremely large profits due to their own advancements in AI.

My reach as a single person is limited, but I hope to educate others who share my concerns who will in turn educate some other people. The companies that will one day achieve this technology have a legal obligation to act in the interest of their shareholders. They have no reason to think beyond profits and power, so it is up to us, software engineers, researchers, and myself to place our future ahead of technological advancements. 

As a computer science student at UVA, I sometimes reflect on my past experiences living in the rural town of Molle Molle in Bolivia. I remember the donkey my grandfather used to own, which he named after a particularly bad president in recent years, and my grandmother’s handmade clay pot for toasting maize. Though they lived through many revolutionary technological advancements, they enjoyed stable employment through their working lives, and they retired when they felt they had worked enough. Just one generation later, my parents had to struggle with a new kind of inequality when trying to find employment. Living in the United States, they realized that technological know-how is not merely a bonus on their resume but instead a necessity for finding employment. My mother struggled to find employment because her accounting degree earned in Bolivia taught her knowledge that had been automated by accounting software. She had to learn to use this software during nights after finishing her shift at McDonald’s just to be competitive among other applicants who had learned these skills at American schools. Computers and programs are distilling human work to only that which they are currently unable to do, and, without intervention and activism for a future-proof attitude towards work and technology, there will not be enough work for people to do.

Collectively, the technologies that endanger the future of work are called artificial intelligence and automation. I first witnessed their ability to have a direct impact on the American job market just after acquiring my first job as an office assistant in 2018. Within my first weeks of working, I had used the programming skills I learned in school to develop simple computer programs called ‘scripts’ that would automate some of my tasks. The programs that I created ran in mere minutes and were able to replicate my work without making any mistakes. Furthermore, almost all computer programs are easily parallelizable, meaning that many programs can run at the same time without needing special hardware or software. These two advantages my scripts had over the other human workers in my team quickly captivated the attention of upper management. A couple of months later, my team shrunk from eight people down to a mere two--myself and my direct supervisor. It took me years to realize the deep impact these programs had on the future of the company and my coworkers. With some basic knowledge of programming, I had permanently put six people out of work. 

Today, Facebook, Google, Twitter, and many other tech giants have access to large teams composed of the best and brightest in artificial intelligence and machine learning with hundreds of thousands more computational power than my laptop back in my office in 2018. How many people will they put out of a job? In a couple of years, computational power will double, and the algorithms they use will be more efficient and more accurate. By that time, how many jobs will no longer exist because machines can outperform their human counterparts? This prospect both scares me of the future and motivates me to inform as many people as I can about this truth I am uniquely qualified to understand. 

As bleak as the future might seem, there is hope to fight against large companies seeking to profit from creating this technological monopoly on work. A company such as Microsoft who developed the software that my mother had no choice but to learn to get a job is composed of people. Microsoft as a whole might not care about the inequality they are propagating as long as it returns a profit, but at least some of their workers do. Some of those workers are very skilled programmers and researchers who are actually the people that develop these programs, and, though they may not realize it, they have an enormous leverage over the decision-making at Microsoft. Together, they can effectively direct the kinds of programs that large software companies develop because of ethical issues. Google employees famously protested against some of the contracts they had with the pentagon for software to aid war troops, and they successfully canceled those contracts (Harwell). Stories similar to this show that individuals working for tech companies can introduce ethics into the decisions that the companies make as a whole. Rather than strategizing solely to maximize profits, companies can act in the interest of the underprivileged and underrepresented people, provided their workers are informed about these people in the first place. 

For people that are not part of these large influential companies but are motivated by issues of social responsibility and technology, there are organizations dedicated to addressing this issue. Most notably, the Future of Human Institute and the University of Oxford are working to address the issue of wealth inequality created by artificial intelligence. Together, they created an agreement called ‘The Windfall Clause’, which aims to redistribute some of the wealth that a company might generate in the event that artificial intelligence becomes extremely profitable. Taxation is a system that can help distribute some of the profits that advanced artificial intelligence systems will inevitably generate. However, taxation stays in the country that collects it. We need a system that crosses borders and benefits everyone in the world. We need this because every nation in the world shares the risk of a misaligned artificial intelligence, so they are entitled to the benefits as well.

Perhaps the greatest unfairness of this issue is the same problem I run into when trying to explain my concerns during a dinner conversation with my family, or while conversing with my non-technical friends. The general public just isn’t equipped with the necessary tools to understand the ramifications of advanced machine intelligence onto every facet of human life. My hope is to become a bridge between the cutting edge of machine intelligence and the general public through an artificial intelligence advocacy website I created. Education and the spread of accurate information are among one of the most important goals for preventing a global surplus of labor. Knowledge about this issue can reach the workers at large tech companies, or future workers who are still in college or high school. This human-centered argument for the future of work can reach university professors, who can in turn educate their students and inform them about issues they will have to struggle with in their lives. Other organizations such as the Future of Life Institute share the same vision. They have a website and a large following of people like me who share concerns over artificial intelligence. I want to make a difference as early as possible because neither artificial intelligence researchers nor I know how much time we have until the tech giants have achieved general artificial intelligence. By that time, it will be too late to find a solution to the problem of inequality and technology. 

At first glance, the opposition to change in the technology field in favor of the majority appears to be extremely robust. Legislation is notorious for lagging behind advancements in technology, and the technical nature of these advancements obfuscate the issue under layers of complexity that are difficult for most to fully comprehend. At their core however, there are people who care about those around them. Deep within those organizations, there are humans who want others to enjoy the same kind of stable employment my grandparents had back when computers and programs didn’t threaten their way of life. If you are privileged enough to understand that technology is an inescapable reality for anyone hoping to provide for their families or to have a stable future, then you can understand the need to democratize the use of technology to ensure that future generations don’t suffer even greater injustices. 
