---
title: Social Responsibility in Tech
date: "2021-01-10T22:12:03.284Z"
description: "A reflection on technology and the future of work"
---


During conversations with friends and family, it’s often difficult to express the importance of safety in artificial intelligence. It’s no exaggeration to say that no group understands the implications of high level machine intelligence, not even ai experts themselves. During a AI conference in 2018, research experts estimated that “unaided machines [would] accomplish every task better and more cheaply than human workers” by 2050. However, the variance within the estimates was very high, which decreases the accuracy of the estimate. No one knows exactly when this immensely disruptive technology will start disrupting the global workforce, but it will happen eventually. And we as a society living on earth must address this problem before it’s too late.

I first witnessed the potential of artificial intelligence and automation having a direct effect on the American job market in 2018. I had just finished High School and was working my first office job at SwimKids in Northern Virginia. Within my first weeks of working, I had used the programming skills I learned in school to develop several computer scripts that would automate office tasks. Within a couple of months of working, the managers had noticed that I often had nothing to do at work. The programs that I created were able to replicate my work without making any mistakes in a couple minutes compared to the hours it took my coworkers to accomplish the same tasks. As a result, my team shrunk from 8 people to a mere 2--myself and my direct supervisor. It took me years to realize the impact that these programs had on the future of the company and my coworkers. With some basic knowledge of programming, I had permanently put 6 people out of work. 

Today, Facebook, Google, Twitter, and many other tech giants have access to large teams composed of the best and brightest in ai and machine learning with hundreds of thousands more computational power than my laptop back in 2018. How many people will they put out of a job? What about a couple years in the future, when their computational power doubles and their methodology improves exponentially, how many jobs will no longer exist because machines can do it better, faster, and more cheaply? This prospect both scares me of the future and motivates me to inform as many people as I can about this truth I am uniquely qualified to understand. 

This issue has motivated me to pursue a computer science degree and to participate in undergraduate ai research. My hope is to become a bridge between the cutting edge of machine intelligence and the general public. I want to make a difference as early as possible because neither ai researchers nor I know how much time we have until the tech giants have achieved general artificial intelligence. Once the genie is out of the bottle, there’s no putting it back in. 

Perhaps the greatest unfairness is the same problem I run into when trying to explain my concerns during a dinner conversation with my family, or while conversing with my non-technical friends. The general public just isn’t equipped with the necessary tools to understand the ramifications of advanced machine intelligence onto every facet of human life. We’re not talking about Alexa coming up with increasingly sophisticated answers to frivolous questions, or video games having more realistic physics simulations. This is a revolution comparable to the advent of the steam machine or the printing press, except much more scalable and available globally within an instant thanks to the internet. 

My immediate goals are creating a website to serve as a platform to voice my concerns in a way that is accessible to everyone. Secondly, I want to persuade employees in the aforementioned tech companies to work within their own organizations to promote a culture of safety and cultural mindfulness so that is entrenched in their minds that their work will one day affect a large portion of the global workforce. Lastly, I want these companies to sign the Windfall Clause, an agreement a company makes to donate a significant portion of their wealth if they ever receive extremely large profits due to their own advancements in AI.

My reach as a single person is limited, but I hope to educate others who share my concerns who will in turn educate some other people. The companies that will one day achieve this technology have a legal obligation to act in the interest of their shareholders. They have no reason to think beyond profits and power, so it is up to us, software engineers, researchers, and myself to place our future ahead of technological advancements. 
